# Spells

This chapter lists all of the spells available to characters.

## Demonic, Level One

### Withering Touch

*Range:* Touch

*Duration:* Instantaneous

*Mana Point Cost:* 2

You touch a living thing and drain its life essence, causing 1d8
damage and making the target visibly weaker and shrivelled. In
humanoids, this can take the form of an almost skeletal appearance,
with sunken eyes and skin stretched thinly over the bones. The
appearance effect lasts until the victim gets a good night's sleep.

## Divine, Level One

### Ease Pain

*Range:* Touch

*Duration:* Instantaneous

*Mana Point Cost:* 2

You lay a hand on a creature or person and they immediately feel
better, both physically and mentally. They regain 1d4+1 lost Hit
Points and any suffering they are undergoing is reduced in
severity.

## Elemental, Level One

### Kindle Flame

*Range:* 5'

*Duration:* Instantaneous

*Mana Point Cost:* 1

A nonliving, flammable object within range suddenly lights on fire.
The initial flame is no bigger than the palm of a hand, but it can
spread quickly.

## Enchantment, Level One

### Levity

*Range:* 30'

*Duration:* 5 minutes

*Mana Point Cost:* 2

A creature in range is suddenly possessed of great joy and happiness.
It is far less likely to be hostile, and far more likely to be
friendly. The effect is cancelled if the creature is attacked or
otherwise harmed.

## Gate Magic, Level One

### Blink Object

*Range:* 10'

*Duration:* Instantaneous

*Mana Point Cost:* 2

A nonliving object smaller than a door is instantly teleported
up to five feet away from its original position. It must teleport
to an empty space.

## Nature, Level One

### Vines

*Range:* 10'

*Duration:* Instantaneous

*Mana Point Cost:* 2

Creeper vines burst from the ground and rapidly grow up the side of
a wall or building in range. The vines cover an area 10' x 10' in
size. After that, they cease their rapid growth and are, for all
intents and purposes, just normal vines.

## Necromancy, Level One

### Speak to Spirits

*Range:* Earshot

*Duration:* 10 minutes

*Mana Point Cost:* 1

The caster sends part of their consciousness into the spirit world.
While in this state, they can speak to any spirits within the immediate
vicinity. Taking damage in the material world will end the spell.

\newpage
