# Equipment

The following is a list of all the equipment that
characters might buy or otherwise acquire through
their adventures.

Note: because freeholds are isolated and have little
in the way of resources, it's unlikely that any given
freehold will have everything in these lists.

In particular, things that require a lot of artisanal
skill to create—like full plate—are going to be
extremely rare.

## Costs and Currency

After the breaking of the world, there was no central
authority to control the value of coinage. As such, no
one currency is considered to be the standard.

Much coinage still exists in the world, but it's judged
by its weight and not its appearance.

For simplicity's sake, all costs in this chapter are
given in gold coins (gc), silver coins (sc), copper
coins (cc), or pieces of eight (pe).

A gold coin is worth ten silver coins.

A silver coin is worth ten copper coins.

So, a gold coin is worth a hundred copper coins.

Also, copper coins are often cut into pieces for smaller
transactions. A single coin will be cut into eight pieces,
and so "pieces of eight" are used for things that cost
less than a copper coin.

Most people do not have a steady income. However, the
average village craftsman will likely earn roughly
8 gc over the course of a year in a freehold.

## Armor

Type        Armor Class  Cost
----------- ------------ -----
Padded      11           2 gc
Leather     12           5 gc
Chain       13           12 gc
Splint      14           17 gc
Scale       15           24 gc
Breastplate 16           50 gc
Full Plate  17           150 gc

Table: Armor

## Shields

Shields increase the user's Armor Class by 1 if worn.
Note: tower shields are not meant to be worn, but rather
to be used as mobile walls.

Type     Cost
-------- -------
Buckler  2 gc
Heater   4 gc
Tower    20 gc

Table: Shields

## Weapons

Type              Cost
----------------- -----
Two-handed Axe    7 gc
Hand axe          4 gc
Short Sword       7 gc
Longsword         10 gc
Two-handed Sword  15 gc
Staff             5 sc
Dagger            1 sc
Pick              1 gc
Morningstar       5 gc
Mace              3 gc
Maul              6 gc
Warhammer         5 gc
Trident           5 gc
Spear             2 gc
Polearm           7 gc
Flail             4 gc
Whip              6 sc
Sling             5 cc
Shortbow          3 gc
Longbow           8 gc
Crossbow          10 gc
Arrows x10        5 sc
Crossbow Bolts x5 1 gc

Table: Weapons

## Tools

These tools are readily available in most freeholds.

Type             Cost
---------------- ----
Anvil            1 gc
Armorer's tools  13 gc
Augur            2 pe
Backpack         5 sc
Bellows          1 gc
Hammer           1 cc
Hand mirror      1 gc
Iron spike       1 pe
Rope (50ft)      1 cc
Sack, large      5 cc
Sack, small      1 cc
Shovel           2 pe
Spade            1 pe
Torch            1 cc
Vise             6 sc

Table: Tools

## Food and Drink

Most common items found in inns and country houses are
listed here. More exotic foods and drinks are covered
in the world-building chapter.

Type                   Cost
---------------------- -----
Ale (good), 1 barrel   4 sc
Ale (good), 1 mug      2 pe
Ale (poor), 1 barrel   2 sc
Ale (poor), 1 mug      1 pe
Egg                    1 pe
Fish (fried)           2 pe
Fish (salted)          4 pe
Handful of sugar       1 sc
Haunch of meat         1 cc
Loaf of bread          1 pe
Meat stew              5 pe
Side of Bacon          6 cc
Wedge of cheese        1 pe
Wine (good), 1 bottle  9 pe
Wine (poor), 1 bottle  3 pe

Table: Food and Drink

## Livestock

While adventuring or travelling for long periods of time,
it may be helpful to have a ready meat source available.

Type          Cost
------------- ----
Chicken       4 pe
Cow           4 sc
Goat          1 sc
Goose         6 pe
Sheep         2 sc

Table: Livestock

## Horses

Horses are valuable. A single quarterhorse is likely the most
expensive thing a typical farmer owns. In the world after the
Breaking, horses that are formally trained for battle are
almost unheard of.

Type          Cost
------------- ------
Quarterhorse  1 gc
Riding horse  10 gc
Warhorse      1,000 gc

Table: Horses

## Housing

Building a house requires land ownership or rent, if you're
building it near a freehold. If you're building in the wilderness,
good luck to you.

Renting a room for a night at an inn varies, but is commonly
less than a copper coin.

Type              Cost
----------------- -----
Cottage           10 gc
Craftman's house  40 gc
Merchant's house  120 gc
Noble's house     500 gc

Table: Housing

\newpage
